Getting started guide (#731)
rust-lang/rustc-dev-guide: src/getting-started.md

### Etiquette

We do ask that you be mindful to include as much useful information as you can
in your question, but we recognize this can be hard if you are unfamiliar with
contributing to Rust.

Just pinging someone without providing any context can be a bit annoying and
just create noise, so we ask that you be mindful of the fact that the
`t-compiler` folks get a lot of pings in a day.

## Cloning and Building

The main repository is [`rust-lang/rust`][repo]. This contains the compiler,
the standard library (including `core`, `alloc`, `test`, `proc_macro`, etc),
and a bunch of tools (e.g. `rustdoc`, the bootstrapping infrastructure, etc).

[repo]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust

There are also a bunch of submodules for things like LLVM, `clippy`, `miri`,
etc. You don't need to clone these immediately, but the build tool will
automatically clone and sync them (more later).

[**Take a look at the "Suggested Workflows" chapter for some helpful
advice.**][suggested]

[suggested]: ./building/suggested.md

### System Requirements

[**See this chapter for detailed software requirements.**](./building/prerequisites.md)

> Most notably, you will need python 2 to run `x.py`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most notably, you will need Python 2 to run `x.py`.
```

There are no hard hardware requirements, but building the compiler is
computationally expensive, so a beefier machine will help, and I wouldn't

> recommend building try to build on a Raspberry Pi :P

Reviewer 2: Do we have docs anywhere about tweaking the build because of hardware constraints? For example, using the `-j` flag to decrease the number of concurrent jobs for machines with smaller amounts of memory. If so, it might be good to link to them in this section.

Reviewer 2: I believe you can save quite a bit of disk space by not using incremental. That's the only other thing I was thinking of.

> recommend building try to build on a Raspberry Pi :P

Reviewer: ```suggestion
recommend trying to build on a Raspberry Pi :P
```

- x86 and ARM are both supported (TODO: confirm)
- Recommended 30GB of free disk space; otherwise, you will have to keep
  clearing incremental caches.
- Recommended >=8GB RAM
- Recommended >=2 cores; more cores really helps
- You will need an internet connection to build; the bootstrapping process
  involves updating git submodules and downloading a beta compiler. It doesn't
  need to be super fast, but that can help.

> Building the compiler take more than half an hour on my moderately powerful

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Building the compiler takes more than half an hour on my moderately powerful
```

> laptop (even longer if you build LLVM).

Reviewer 2: Might be worth noting that LLVM will be built the first time you build the compiler.

### Cloning

You can just do a normal git clone:

```shell
git clone https://github.com/rust-lang/rust.git
```

You don't need to clone the submodules at this time.

**Pro tip**: if you contribute often, you may want to look at the git worktrees
tip in [this chapter][suggested].

### Configuring the Compiler

The compiler has a configuration file which contains a ton of settings. We will
provide some recommendations here that should work for most, but [check out
this chapter for more info][config].

[config]: ./building/how-to-build-and-run.html#create-a-configtoml

In the top level of the repo:

```shell
cp config.toml.example config.toml
```

Then, edit `config.toml`. You will need to search for, uncomment, and update
the following settings:

- `debug = true`: enables debug symbols and `debug!` logging, takes a bit longer to compile.
- `incremental = true`: enables incremental compilation of the compiler itself.
  This is turned off by default because it's technically unsound. Sometimes
  this will cause weird crashes, but it can really speed things up.
- `llvm-config`: enable building with system LLVM. [See this chapter][sysllvm]

>   for more info. This avoids having to build LLVM, which takes forever.

Reviewer 2: Maybe just say "can take a while"? 🙂

[sysllvm]: ./building/suggested.html#building-with-system-llvm

### `./x.py` Intro

`rustc` is a bootstrapping compiler because it is written in Rust. Where do you

> get do you get the original compiler from? We use the current `beta` compiler

Reviewer: ```suggestion
get the original compiler from? We use the current `beta` compiler
````

Reviewer: Link to info about the release train here?

Just pinging someone without providing any context can be a bit annoying and
just create noise, so we ask that you be mindful of the fact that the
`t-compiler` folks get a lot of pings in a day.

## Cloning and Building

The main repository is [`rust-lang/rust`][repo]. This contains the compiler,
the standard library (including `core`, `alloc`, `test`, `proc_macro`, etc),
and a bunch of tools (e.g. `rustdoc`, the bootstrapping infrastructure, etc).

[repo]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust

There are also a bunch of submodules for things like LLVM, `clippy`, `miri`,
etc. You don't need to clone these immediately, but the build tool will
automatically clone and sync them (more later).

[**Take a look at the "Suggested Workflows" chapter for some helpful
advice.**][suggested]

[suggested]: ./building/suggested.md

### System Requirements

[**See this chapter for detailed software requirements.**](./building/prerequisites.md)
Most notably, you will need Python 2 to run `x.py`.

There are no hard hardware requirements, but building the compiler is
computationally expensive, so a beefier machine will help, and I wouldn't
recommend trying to build on a Raspberry Pi :P

> - x86 and ARM are both supported (TODO: confirm)

Author: Can someone confirm this please?

Author: I just removed this line for now... I don't think people will run into this too much anyway.

just be implemented directly in stable Rust. Instead, we have 3 release
channels: stable, beta, and nightly.

- **Stable**: this is the latest stable release for general usage.
- **Beta**: this is the next release (will be stable within 6 weeks).
- **Nightly**: follows the `master` branch of the repo. This is the only
  channel where unstable, incomplete, or experimental features are usable with
  feature gates.

In order to implement a new feature, usually you will need to go through [the
RFC process][rfc] to propose a design, have discussions, etc. In some cases,
small features can be added with only an FCP (see below). If in doubt, ask the
compiler, language, or libs team (whichever is most relevant).

[rfc]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/README.md

After a feature is approved to be added, a tracking issue is created on the
`rust-lang/rust` repo, which tracks the progress towards the implementation of
the feature, any bugs reported, and eventually stabilization.

The feature then needs to be implemented behind a feature gate, which prevents
it from being accidentally used.

Finally, somebody may propose stabilizing the feature in an upcoming version of

> Rust. This requires an FCP (see below) to get the approval of the relevant teams.

Reviewer: Write FCP out in full?

```suggestion
Rust. This requires a Final Comment Period (see below) to get the approval of the relevant teams.
```

[crater]: https://github.com/rust-lang/crater

### Major Changes

The compiler team has a special process for large changes, whether or not they
cause breakage. This process is call Major Change Proposal (MCP). MCP is a
relatively lightweight mechanism for getting feedback on large changes to the
compiler (as opposed to a full RFC or a design meeting with the team).

Example of things that might require MCPs include major refactorings, changes
to important types, or important changes to how the compiler does something.

**When in doubt, ask on [zulip][z]. We would hate for you to put a lot of work
into a PR that ends up not getting merged!**

### Performance

Compiler performance is important. We have put a lot of effort over the last
few years into [gradually improving it][perfdash].

[perfdash]: https://perf.rust-lang.org/dashboard.html

If you suspect that your change may cause a performance regression (or
improvement), you can request a "perf run" (your reviewer may also request one
before approving). This is yet another bot that will compile a collection of
benchmarks on a compiler with your changes. The numbers are reported

> [here][perf], and you can see a comparison of your changes against the latest
> master.
> 
> [perf]: https://perf.rust-lang.org/dashboard.html

Reviewer: You link to the same thing with two different names :)

```suggestion
[here][perfdash], and you can see a comparison of your changes against the latest
master.
```

Author: Oops, this was meant to link to just the home page!

## Other Resources

- This guide: talks about how `rustc` works
- [The t-compiler zulip][z]

> - [The compiler's documentation (rustdocs)](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_middle/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [The compiler's documentation (rustdocs)](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/)
```

Reviewer 3: Hm, I think the current is fine.

Reviewer: But `rustc_middle` is just one part of the compiler; it doesn't include parsing, AST, etc.

Reviewer 3: It's just an entry point, we can search everything in the compiler from there. But yeah I didn't know the current nightly-rustc doc has the index page. If we accept this, we could also update the same links in this guide to simplify.

Author: That's true. I honestly have no idea why, but we always link to `rustc_middle`. I am willing to change this, but I am curious to hear what the others say.

Reviewer: Huh, I didn't realize that! Perhaps the reason why is as the crate describes it:

> The "main crate" of the Rust compiler. This crate contains common type definitions that are used by the other crates in the rustc "family".

Reviewer 3: > I honestly have no idea why, but we always link to rustc_middle

IIRC we didn't have the index page until recently. And it was `/nightly-rustc/rustc` before renaming so people may have thought _it was the index page_.

Reviewer: Which crate was `/nightly-rustc/rustc`? `rustc_middle`?

Reviewer 3: > Which crate was /nightly-rustc/rustc? rustc_middle?

We renamed `librustc` to `librustc_middle` a while ago.

> TODO: am I missing any?

Author: If anybody has suggestions of things to add here, that would be welcome.

Reviewer: Add [Rust Forge](https://forge.rust-lang.org)?

- Recommended >=30GB of free disk space; otherwise, you will have to keep
  clearing incremental caches. More space is better, the compiler is a bit of a
  hog; it's a problem we are aware of.
- Recommended >=8GB RAM.
- Recommended >=2 cores; more cores really helps.
- You will need an internet connection to build; the bootstrapping process
  involves updating git submodules and downloading a beta compiler. It doesn't
  need to be super fast, but that can help.

Building the compiler takes more than half an hour on my moderately powerful
laptop. The first time you build the compiler, LLVM will also be built unless
you use system LLVM (see below).

Like `cargo`, the build system will use as many cores as possible. Sometimes
this can cause you to run low on memory. You can use `-j` to adjust the number
concurrent jobs.

Also, if you don't have too much free disk space, you may want to turn off
incremental compilation (see the "Configuring" section below). This will make
compilation take longer, but will save a ton of space from the incremental
caches.

### Cloning

You can just do a normal git clone:

```shell
git clone https://github.com/rust-lang/rust.git
```

> You don't need to clone the submodules at this time.

Author: It might be good to mention the following command here for people who do want to update submoduels:

```sh
# first time
git submodule update --init --recursive

# subsequent times (to pull new commits)
git submodule update
```

**Pro tip**: if you contribute often, you may want to look at the git worktrees
tip in [this chapter][suggested].

### Configuring the Compiler

The compiler has a configuration file which contains a ton of settings. We will
provide some recommendations here that should work for most, but [check out
this chapter for more info][config].

[config]: ./building/how-to-build-and-run.html#create-a-configtoml

In the top level of the repo:

```shell
cp config.toml.example config.toml
```

Then, edit `config.toml`. You will need to search for, uncomment, and update
the following settings:

- `debug = true`: enables debug symbols and `debug!` logging, takes a bit longer to compile.
- `incremental = true`: enables incremental compilation of the compiler itself.
  This is turned off by default because it's technically unsound. Sometimes
  this will cause weird crashes, but it can really speed things up.

> - `llvm-config`: enable building with system LLVM. [See this chapter][sysllvm]

Reviewer: For consistency:

```suggestion
- `llvm-config`: enables building with system LLVM. [See this chapter][sysllvm]
```

>   for more info. This avoids building LLVM, which can take a while.

Reviewer: Do you want to mention the rough timescale of how long it takes? I know that I would have liked to know in advance roughly how long it takes.

I know that it definitely varies across different computers, but mentioning a general range might be helpful. E.g., for me, I think it took around 30 minutes.

Reviewer: Also mention that it doesn't have to be rebuilt that often?

Reviewer 4: > for me, I think it took around 30 minutes.

It took me a while the first time (maybe ~15 minutes?) but incremental rebuilds are pretty fast, maybe 1-3 minutes.

Author: @jyn514 I'm curious what are you rebuilding and what is your hardware? In my experience, it depends on how much you need to rebuild (e.g. if you touch `librustc`, then you need to rebuild a bunch of stuff)...

Reviewer 4: Oh sorry I meant just for LLVM. Rebuilding rustc takes much longer.

[sysllvm]: ./building/suggested.html#building-with-system-llvm

### `./x.py` Intro

`rustc` is a bootstrapping compiler because it is written in Rust. Where do you
get the original compiler from? We use the current beta compiler
to build the compiler. Then, we use that compiler to build itself. Thus,
`rustc` has a 2-stage build.

We have a special tool `./x.py` that drives this process. It is used for
compiling the compiler, the standard libraries, and `rustdoc`. It is also used
for driving CI and building the final release artifacts.

> ### Building and Testing `rustc`

Reviewer: Mention `--keep-stage 1`?

### Etiquette

We do ask that you be mindful to include as much useful information as you can
in your question, but we recognize this can be hard if you are unfamiliar with
contributing to Rust.

Just pinging someone without providing any context can be a bit annoying and
just create noise, so we ask that you be mindful of the fact that the
`t-compiler` folks get a lot of pings in a day.

## Cloning and Building

The main repository is [`rust-lang/rust`][repo]. This contains the compiler,
the standard library (including `core`, `alloc`, `test`, `proc_macro`, etc),
and a bunch of tools (e.g. `rustdoc`, the bootstrapping infrastructure, etc).

[repo]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust

There are also a bunch of submodules for things like LLVM, `clippy`, `miri`,
etc. You don't need to clone these immediately, but the build tool will
automatically clone and sync them (more later).

[**Take a look at the "Suggested Workflows" chapter for some helpful
advice.**][suggested]

[suggested]: ./building/suggested.md

### System Requirements

[**See this chapter for detailed software requirements.**](./building/prerequisites.md)

> Most notably, you will need Python 2 to run `x.py`.

Reviewer 4: Do we know if python3 works and python2 is just the default, or whether python2 is required? Anecdotally I changed the shebang to `/usr/bin/env python3` and `x.py check` still worked, but I don't know if that's true for all of it.

Author: Yes, I believe both are supported: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/66605

Reviewer: Do you want to say “you will need Python 2 or Python 3” then?

to build the compiler. Then, we use that compiler to build itself. Thus,
`rustc` has a 2-stage build.

We have a special tool `./x.py` that drives this process. It is used for
compiling the compiler, the standard libraries, and `rustdoc`. It is also used
for driving CI and building the final release artifacts.

### Building and Testing `rustc`

For most contributions, you only need to build stage 1, which saves a lot of time.
After updating `config.toml`, as mentioned above, you can use `./x.py`:

```shell
# Build the compiler (stage 1)
./x.py build --stage 1

# Subsequent builds
./x.py build --stage 1 --keep-stage 1
```

This will take a while, especially the first time. Be wary of accidentally
touching or formatting the compiler, as `./x.py` will try to recompile it.

**NOTE**: The `--keep-stage 1` will _assume_ that the stage 0 standard library
does not need to be rebuilt, which is usually true, which will save some time.
However, if you are changing certain parts of the compiler, this may lead to
weird errors. Feel free to ask on [zulip][z] if you are running into issues.

To run the compiler's UI test suite (the bulk of the test suite):

```
# UI tests

> ./x.py test --stage 1 src/test/ui [--keep-stage 1]

Reviewer: I suggest separating this into two lines like above, because it might be a little bit confusing otherwise.

```suggestion
# First build
./x.py test --stage 1 src/test/ui

# Subsequent builds
./x.py test --stage 1 src/test/ui --keep-stage 1
```

Reviewer: The `--keep-stage 1` option confused me when I was getting started - I wasn't sure whether it was the compiler that was being kept, or some build of the test suite, or something else. I don't know if that's something other people run into, but I wanted to mention it just in case.

Author: Yeah, the naming is not ideal... also the numbering of the stages...

```

This will build the compiler first, if needed.

This will be enough for most people. Notably, though, it mostly tests the
compiler frontend, not codegen or debug info.  You can read more about the
different test suites [in this chapter][testing].

[testing]: https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/tests/intro.html

If you only want to check that the compiler builds (without actually building
it) you can run the following:

```shell
./x.py check
```

To format the code:

```shell
# Actually format
./x.py fmt

# Just check formatting, exit with error
./x.py fmt --check
```

You can use `RUSTC_LOG=XXX` to get debug logging. [Read more here][logging].

[logging]: ./compiler-debugging.html#getting-logging-output

### Building and Testing `std`/`core`/`alloc`/`test`/`proc_macro`/etc.

To contribute to `libstd`, you don't need to build the compiler unless you are
planning to use a recently added nightly feature. Instead, you can just build
stage 0.

```sh
./x.py build --stage 0 src/libstd
```

> TODO: how to test?

Reviewer 4: I think this would work for std?
```suggestion
x.py test --stage 0 src/libstd
```

### Building and Testing `rustdoc`

`rustdoc` uses `rustc` internals (and, of course, the standard library), so you
will have to build the compiler and `std` once before you can build `rustdoc`.

The following command will build all of them. Stage 1 should be sufficient,
even though the release version will use the full 2-stage build.

```sh
# First build
./x.py build --stage 1 src/tools/rustdoc

# Subsequent builds
./x.py build --stage 1 --keep-stage 1 src/tools/rustdoc
```

You can also use `./x.py check` here to do a fast check build.

> TODO: how to test?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Rustdoc has two types of tests: content tests and UI tests.

```sh
# Content tests
./x.py test --stage 1 src/test/rustdoc

# UI tests
./x.py test --stage 1 src/test/rustdoc-ui

# Both at once
./x.py test --stage 1 src/test/rustdoc*
```
```

### Contributing code to other Rust projects

> There are a bunch of other projects that one can contribute too outside of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a bunch of other projects that you can contribute to outside of the
```

I suggest “you” because it’s what you use in the rest of the page

approve the PR to be tested and merged. If you want a specific reviewer (e.g. a
team member you've been working with), you can specifically request them by
writing `r? @user` (e.g. `r? @eddyb`) in either the original post or a followup
comment.

The reviewer may request some changes using the GitHub code review interface.
They may also request special procedures (such as a crater run; see below) for
some PRs.

When the PR is ready to be merged, the reviewer will issue a command to
`@bors`, the CI bot. Usually, this is `@bors r+` or `@bors r=@user` to approve
a PR (there are few other commands, but they are less relevant here). This puts
the PR in [bors's queue][bors] to be tested and merged. Be patient; this can take a
while and the queue can sometimes be long. PRs are never merged by hand.

[bors]: https://buildbot2.rust-lang.org/homu/queue/rust

### Bug Fixes or "Normal" code changes

For most PRs, no special procedures are needed. You can just open a PR, and it
will be reviewed, approved, and merged. This includes most bug fixes,
refactorings, and other user-invisible changes. The next few sections talk
about exceptions to this rule.

> Also, note that is perfectly acceptable to open WIP PRs or GitHub [Draft

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Also, note that it is perfectly acceptable to open WIP PRs or GitHub [Draft
```

`rust-lang/rust` repo, which tracks the progress towards the implementation of
the feature, any bugs reported, and eventually stabilization.

The feature then needs to be implemented behind a feature gate, which prevents
it from being accidentally used.

Finally, somebody may propose stabilizing the feature in an upcoming version of
Rust. This requires a Final Comment Period (see below) to get the approval of the relevant teams.

After that, the feature gate can be removed and the feature turned on for all users.

[For more details on this process, see this chapter.](./implementing_new_features.md)

### Breaking Changes

As mentioned above, Rust has strong backwards-compatibility guarantees. To this
end, we are reluctant to make breaking changes. However, sometimes they are
needed to correct compiler bugs (e.g. code that compiled but should not) or
make progress on some features.

Depending on the scale of the breakage, there are a few different actions that
can be taken.  If the reviewer believes the breakage is very minimal (i.e. very
unlikely to be actually encountered by users), they may just merge the change.

> More often, they will request a Final Comment Period (FCP), which calls for

Reviewer: I’m not sure if this is possible, but do you want to add links at the places where you mention FCP to this explanation?

Reviewer 6: Shouldn't be hard to find, as all of them are labeled [`proposed-final-comment-period`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/labels/proposed-final-comment-period), [`final-comment-period`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/labels/final-comment-period) or [`finished-final-comment-period`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/labels/finished-final-comment-period) accordingly 😇

Reviewer: That would probably be helpful too, but yeah, I meant the places _in this document_ where FCP is mentioned and it says “see below” :)

rough consensus among the members of a relevant team. The team members can
discuss the issue and either accept, reject, or request changes on the PR.

If the scale of breakage is large, a deprecation warning may be needed. This is
a warning that the compiler will display to users whose code will break in the
future.  After some time, an FCP can be used to move forward with the actual
breakage.

If the scale of breakage is unknown, a team member or contributor may request a
[crater] run. This is a bot that will compile all crates.io crates and many
public github repos with the compiler with your changes. A report will then be
generated with crates that ceased to compile with or began to compile with your
changes. Crater runs can take a few days to complete.

[crater]: https://github.com/rust-lang/crater

### Major Changes

The compiler team has a special process for large changes, whether or not they

> cause breakage. This process is call Major Change Proposal (MCP). MCP is a

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
cause breakage. This process is called Major Change Proposal (MCP). MCP is a
```

Reviewer: And perhaps add "a" before "Major Change Proposal"?

compiler (as opposed to a full RFC or a design meeting with the team).

Example of things that might require MCPs include major refactorings, changes
to important types, or important changes to how the compiler does something.

**When in doubt, ask on [zulip][z]. We would hate for you to put a lot of work
into a PR that ends up not getting merged!**

### Performance

Compiler performance is important. We have put a lot of effort over the last
few years into [gradually improving it][perfdash].

[perfdash]: https://perf.rust-lang.org/dashboard.html

If you suspect that your change may cause a performance regression (or
improvement), you can request a "perf run" (your reviewer may also request one
before approving). This is yet another bot that will compile a collection of
benchmarks on a compiler with your changes. The numbers are reported
[here][perf], and you can see a comparison of your changes against the latest
master.

[perf]: https://perf.rust-lang.org

## Other Resources

- This guide: talks about how `rustc` works
- [The t-compiler zulip][z]
- [The compiler's documentation (rustdocs)](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/)

> - [The Forge](https://forge.rust-lang.org/) has more documentation about various procedures.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [The Forge](https://forge.rust-lang.org/) has more documentation about various procedures.
- `#contribute`, `#compiler`, and `#rustdoc` on [Discord](https://discord.gg/rust-lang).
```

automatically clone and sync them (more later).

[**Take a look at the "Suggested Workflows" chapter for some helpful
advice.**][suggested]

[suggested]: ./building/suggested.md

### System Requirements

[**See this chapter for detailed software requirements.**](./building/prerequisites.md)
Most notably, you will need Python 2 or 3 to run `x.py`.

There are no hard hardware requirements, but building the compiler is
computationally expensive, so a beefier machine will help, and I wouldn't
recommend trying to build on a Raspberry Pi :P

- Recommended >=30GB of free disk space; otherwise, you will have to keep
  clearing incremental caches. More space is better, the compiler is a bit of a
  hog; it's a problem we are aware of.
- Recommended >=8GB RAM.
- Recommended >=2 cores; more cores really helps.
- You will need an internet connection to build; the bootstrapping process
  involves updating git submodules and downloading a beta compiler. It doesn't
  need to be super fast, but that can help.

Building the compiler takes more than half an hour on my moderately powerful
laptop. The first time you build the compiler, LLVM will also be built unless

> you use system LLVM (see below).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
you use your system's LLVM (see below).
```

Like `cargo`, the build system will use as many cores as possible. Sometimes
this can cause you to run low on memory. You can use `-j` to adjust the number
concurrent jobs.

Also, if you don't have too much free disk space, you may want to turn off
incremental compilation (see the "Configuring" section below). This will make
compilation take longer, but will save a ton of space from the incremental
caches.

### Cloning

You can just do a normal git clone:

```shell
git clone https://github.com/rust-lang/rust.git
```

You don't need to clone the submodules at this time. But if you want to, you
can do the following:

> ```sh

Reviewer 6: This is mostly unimportant, but should we stick to either `shell` or `sh` for the code blocks?

Author: I have no strong preference personally.

Author: Changing them to `sh`.

# first time
git submodule update --init --recursive

# subsequent times (to pull new commits)
git submodule update
```

**Pro tip**: if you contribute often, you may want to look at the git worktrees

> tip in [this chapter][suggested].

Reviewer 6: Unsure if this is useful in a "getting started". I think it might be either a little disruptive because readers will look at that chapter, or useless because readers will carry on and forget :)

### Configuring the Compiler

The compiler has a configuration file which contains a ton of settings. We will
provide some recommendations here that should work for most, but [check out
this chapter for more info][config].

[config]: ./building/how-to-build-and-run.html#create-a-configtoml

In the top level of the repo:

```shell
cp config.toml.example config.toml
```

Then, edit `config.toml`. You may want to search for, uncomment, and update
the following settings:

- `debug = true`: enables debug symbols and `debug!` logging, takes a bit longer to compile.
- `incremental = true`: enables incremental compilation of the compiler itself,
  which can significantly speed things up.  This is turned off by default
  because it's technically unsound; sometimes it will cause weird crashes.
  Also, it can consume a lot of disk space. This has the same effect as the
  `-i` or `--incremental` flags.
- `llvm-config`: enables building with system LLVM. [See this chapter][sysllvm]
  for more info. This avoids building LLVM, which can take a while.

[sysllvm]: ./building/suggested.html#building-with-system-llvm

### `./x.py` Intro

> `rustc` is a _bootstrapping_ compiler because it is written in Rust. Where do you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`rustc` is a _bootstrapping_ compiler, which means that it is written in Rust. So where do you
```

> `rustc` is a _bootstrapping_ compiler, which means that it is written in Rust. So where do you

Reviewer 6: Seems noteworthy to me.
```suggestion
`rustc` is a _bootstrapping_ compiler, which means that it is written in Rust and thus needs to be compiled by itself. So where do you
```

get the original compiler from? We use the current beta compiler

> to build the compiler. Then, we use that compiler to build itself. Thus,

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
to build a new compiler. Then, we use that compiler to build itself. Thus,
```

`rustc` has a 2-stage build. You can read more about bootstrapping

> [here][boot], but you don't need more to contribute.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
[here][boot], but you don't need to know much more to contribute.
```

[boot]: ./building/bootstrapping.md

We have a special tool `./x.py` that drives this process. It is used for

> compiling the compiler, the standard libraries, and `rustdoc`. It is also used

Reviewer 6: Too many compilers :D
```suggestion
building the compiler, the standard libraries, and `rustdoc`. It is also used
```

> compiling the compiler, the standard libraries, and `rustdoc`. It is also used

Reviewer 6: I think I've always heard of the "standard library" as a single piece of code, but I might be wrong and this is a nitpick, really 😄
*I need those nits to make a review. Because there isn't much to say otherwise...*
```suggestion
compiling the compiler, the standard library, and `rustdoc`. It is also used
```

Author: Mostly I said libraries because there is std, core, alloc, proc_macro, test, etc... not sure what else to call them.

for how to do "the correct thing", but then we also give various tips to speed
things up.

### Building and Testing `rustc`

To do a full 2-stage build of the whole compiler, you should run this (after
updating `config.toml` as mentioned above):

```sh
./x.py build
```

In the process, this will also necessarily build the standard libraries, and it
will build `rustdoc` (which doesn't take too long).

To build and test everything:

```sh
./x.py test
```

For most contributions, you only need to build stage 1, which saves a lot of time:

```shell
# Build the compiler (stage 1)
./x.py build --stage 1

# Subsequent builds
./x.py build --stage 1 --keep-stage 1
```

This will take a while, especially the first time. Be wary of accidentally
touching or formatting the compiler, as `./x.py` will try to recompile it.

**NOTE**: The `--keep-stage 1` will _assume_ that the stage 0 standard library
does not need to be rebuilt, which is usually true, which will save some time.
However, if you are changing certain parts of the compiler, this may lead to
weird errors. Feel free to ask on [zulip][z] if you are running into issues.

> This runs a ton of tests and takes a long time to complete. If you are

Reviewer 6: I am unsure that the tests take all available CPU cores to run, and in my experience I was under the impression that the tests ran faster if I passed the `--jobs` flag. I am sure of nothing though, I should probably dive into the sources for the bootstrap to find out.

Author: TMK, compiletest will use all available CPUs and run as many parallel tasks as possible. I might be wrong though. I just remember that on my laptop compiletest will max out CPU.

Reviewer 4: >  the tests ran faster if I passed the --jobs flag

This depends on what you have `codegen-units` set to in `config.toml`. I have it set to `codegen-units = 0` but I think the default might be 1.

test are mostly for the frontend of the compiler, so if you are working on LLVM
or codegen, this shortcut will _not_ test your changes. You can read more about the
different test suites [in this chapter][testing].

[uitests]: ./tests/adding.html#ui
[testing]: https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/tests/intro.html

```
# First build
./x.py test --stage 1 src/test/ui

# Subsequent builds
./x.py test --stage 1 src/test/ui --keep-stage 1
```

While working on the compiler, it can be helpful to see if the code just
compiles (similar to `cargo check`) without actually building it. You can do
this with:

```shell
./x.py check
```

This command is really fast (relative to the other commands). It usually
completes in a couple of minutes on my laptop.

Finally, the CI ensures that the codebase is using consistent style. To format
the code:

```shell
# Actually format
./x.py fmt

# Just check formatting, exit with error
./x.py fmt --check
```

*Note*: we don't use stable `rustfmt`; we use a pinned version with a special
config, so this may result in different style from normal `rustfmt` if you have
format-on-save turned on. It's a good habit to run `./x.py fmt` before every

> commit, as this reduces conflicts later.

Reviewer 6: I think we should add that you can actually use that "pinned version" of `rustfmt` which is built under `build/<target>/stage0/bin/rustfmt`. Knowing this allows to use it directly to format a single file, which `./x.py fmt` cannot do IIRC.

Reviewer 4: I didn't know that, that's super helpful! x.py fmt takes half a minute to run for me, running on only a single file will make it much quicker.

Reviewer 6: Yes, that also saved my life, now I have this as an alias, and I use it in `rust-analyzer` :)

Like `cargo`, the build system will use as many cores as possible. Sometimes
this can cause you to run low on memory. You can use `-j` to adjust the number
concurrent jobs.

Also, if you don't have too much free disk space, you may want to turn off
incremental compilation ([see below][configsec]). This will make
compilation take longer, but will save a ton of space from the incremental
caches.

### Cloning

You can just do a normal git clone:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/rust-lang/rust.git
```

You don't need to clone the submodules at this time. But if you want to, you
can do the following:

```sh
# first time
git submodule update --init --recursive

# subsequent times (to pull new commits)
git submodule update
```

### Configuring the Compiler

The compiler has a configuration file which contains a ton of settings. We will
provide some recommendations here that should work for most, but [check out
this chapter for more info][config].

[config]: ./building/how-to-build-and-run.html#create-a-configtoml

In the top level of the repo:

```sh
cp config.toml.example config.toml
```

Then, edit `config.toml`. You may want to search for, uncomment, and update

> the following settings:

Reviewer 4: Without `debug = true`, you won't see any `debug!` logging. @eddyb recommended `debug = true` and `debuginfo = 1` a while back, maybe we could change debuginfo to default to 1 instead of 2 when `debug` is set?

> the following settings:

Author: I've started this hackmd to collect various suggestions that have come up: https://hackmd.io/@ux-jKBcgRTSHsH042VF3BA/rkXEozKTU/edit

`rustc` has a 2-stage build. You can read more about bootstrapping
[here][boot], but you don't need to know much more to contribute.

[boot]: ./building/bootstrapping.md

We have a special tool `./x.py` that drives this process. It is used for
building the compiler, the standard libraries, and `rustdoc`. It is also used
for driving CI and building the final release artifacts.

Unfortunately, a proper 2-stage build takes a long time depending on your
hardware, but it is the only correct way to build everything (e.g. it's what
the CI and release processes use). **However, in most cases, you can get by
without a full 2-stage build**. In the following section, we give instructions
for how to do "the correct thing", but then we also give various tips to speed
things up.

### Building and Testing `rustc`

To do a full 2-stage build of the whole compiler, you should run this (after
updating `config.toml` as mentioned above):

```sh
./x.py build
```

In the process, this will also necessarily build the standard libraries, and it
will build `rustdoc` (which doesn't take too long).

To build and test everything:

```sh
./x.py test
```

> For most contributions, you only need to build stage 1, which saves a lot of time:

Reviewer 4: I think it would also be nice to switch the default to `--stage 1` at some point and make `--stage 2` opt-in. I think the only regular use of stage 2 is for CI (??)

> For most contributions, you only need to build stage 1, which saves a lot of time:

Author: So, I definitely agree that I think we should make the "default" commands the ones that most people need rather than what release does (e.g. `./x.py build` would do a stage-1 incremental build), but it also seems odd to have the default command be technically unsound...

I'm not really sure what to make of this situation...

> For most contributions, you only need to build stage 1, which saves a lot of time:

Author: Oh, also, I forgot to mention `--bless`...

> For most contributions, you only need to build stage 1, which saves a lot of time:

Reviewer: I vote for the most common commands first, with a disclaimer that they may not work and you should ask on Zulip.

Since it’s a getting started guide, I think the command that beginners will use more should be at the top.

Maybe mention that after a major rust release, you should run the sound command since now the older part was compiled with a different compiler? At least, I think I needed to do that after 1.44

> For most contributions, you only need to build stage 1, which saves a lot of time:

Reviewer: Maybe say not to worry about using less often since you can just compare the git diff later? At first I thought it was better to edit stderr manually, until I realized I could just diff later

> For most contributions, you only need to build stage 1, which saves a lot of time:

Author: I added Niko's table to the top of the section.

```sh
# First build
./x.py build --stage 1 src/tools/rustdoc

# Subsequent builds
./x.py build --stage 1 --keep-stage 1 src/tools/rustdoc
```

As with the compiler, you can do a fast check build:

```sh
./x.py check
```

Rustdoc has two types of tests: content tests and UI tests.

```sh
# Content tests
./x.py test --stage 1 src/test/rustdoc

# UI tests
./x.py test --stage 1 src/test/rustdoc-ui

# Both at once
./x.py test --stage 1 src/test/rustdoc*
```

### Contributing code to other Rust projects

There are a bunch of other projects that you can contribute to outside of the
`rust-lang/rust` repo, including `clippy`, `miri`, `chalk`, and many others.

These repos might have their own contributing guidelines and procedures. Many
of them are owned by working groups (e.g. `chalk` is largely owned by
WG-traits). For more info, see the documentation in those repos' READMEs.

### Other ways to contribute

There are a bunch of other ways you can contribute, especially if you don't
feel comfortable jumping straight into the large `rust-lang/rust` codebase.

The following tasks are doable without much background knowledge but are
incredibly helpful:

> - [ICE-breakers Cleanup crew][iceb]: find minimal reproductions of ICEs, bisect

Reviewer 6: I think this isn't called "ICE-breaker" anymore. I think the new terminology is simply "Cleanup crew" or "Cleanup crew notification group".
```suggestion
- [ICleanup crew][iceb]: find minimal reproductions of ICEs, bisect
```

  to learn some part of the compiler while also producing a useful artifact!
- [Working groups][wg]: there are a bunch of working groups on a wide variety
  of rust-related things.

[iceb]: ./ice-breaker/cleanup-crew.md
[wg]: https://rust-lang.github.io/compiler-team/working-groups/

## Contributor Procedures

There are some official procedures to know about. This is a tour of the
highlights, but there are a lot more details, which we will link to below.

### Code Review

When you open a PR on the `rust-lang/rust` repo, a bot called `@rust-highfive` will
automatically assign a reviewer to the PR. The reviewer is the person that will
approve the PR to be tested and merged. If you want a specific reviewer (e.g. a
team member you've been working with), you can specifically request them by
writing `r? @user` (e.g. `r? @eddyb`) in either the original post or a followup
comment.

The reviewer may request some changes using the GitHub code review interface.
They may also request special procedures (such as a [crater] run; [see
below][break]) for some PRs.

[break]: #breaking-changes

When the PR is ready to be merged, the reviewer will issue a command to

> `@bors`, the CI bot. Usually, this is `@bors r+` or `@bors r=@user` to approve

Reviewer 6: I think I've more often seen invocations ran as `@bors r=user` without the `@`, but I might be wrong and both syntaxes might be valid.
In case it's useful:
```suggestion
`@bors`, the CI bot. Usually, this is `@bors r+` or `@bors r=user` to approve
```

- **Nightly**: follows the `master` branch of the repo. This is the only
  channel where unstable, incomplete, or experimental features are usable with
  feature gates.

In order to implement a new feature, usually you will need to go through [the
RFC process][rfc] to propose a design, have discussions, etc. In some cases,
small features can be added with only an FCP ([see below][break]). If in doubt, ask the
compiler, language, or libs team (whichever is most relevant).

[rfc]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/README.md

After a feature is approved to be added, a tracking issue is created on the
`rust-lang/rust` repo, which tracks the progress towards the implementation of
the feature, any bugs reported, and eventually stabilization.

The feature then needs to be implemented behind a feature gate, which prevents
it from being accidentally used.

Finally, somebody may propose stabilizing the feature in an upcoming version of
Rust. This requires a Final Comment Period ([see below][break]) to get the
approval of the relevant teams.

After that, the feature gate can be removed and the feature turned on for all users.

> [For more details on this process, see this chapter.](./implementing_new_features.md)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
[For more details on this process, see this chapter on implementing new features.](./implementing_new_features.md)
```

### Breaking Changes

As mentioned above, Rust has strong backwards-compatibility guarantees. To this
end, we are reluctant to make breaking changes. However, sometimes they are
needed to correct compiler bugs (e.g. code that compiled but should not) or
make progress on some features.

Depending on the scale of the breakage, there are a few different actions that
can be taken.  If the reviewer believes the breakage is very minimal (i.e. very
unlikely to be actually encountered by users), they may just merge the change.
More often, they will request a Final Comment Period (FCP), which calls for
rough consensus among the members of a relevant team. The team members can
discuss the issue and either accept, reject, or request changes on the PR.

If the scale of breakage is large, a deprecation warning may be needed. This is
a warning that the compiler will display to users whose code will break in the

> future.  After some time, an FCP can be used to move forward with the actual

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
future. After some time, an FCP can be used to move forward with the actual
```

Reviewer: What timescale is “some time”? I think it might be good to mention whether it’s weeks, months, a year.

breakage.

If the scale of breakage is unknown, a team member or contributor may request a
[crater] run. This is a bot that will compile all crates.io crates and many
public github repos with the compiler with your changes. A report will then be
generated with crates that ceased to compile with or began to compile with your
changes. Crater runs can take a few days to complete.

[crater]: https://github.com/rust-lang/crater

### Major Changes

The compiler team has a special process for large changes, whether or not they
cause breakage. This process is called a Major Change Proposal (MCP). MCP is a
relatively lightweight mechanism for getting feedback on large changes to the
compiler (as opposed to a full RFC or a design meeting with the team).

Example of things that might require MCPs include major refactorings, changes

> to important types, or important changes to how the compiler does something.

Reviewer 6: I think we should also add "user-facing changes" here.

> **When in doubt, ask on [zulip][z]. We would hate for you to put a lot of work
> into a PR that ends up not getting merged!**

Reviewer 6: I don't really like the wording of this, but this may be unjustified. Here's another proposition, but I still don't feel satisfied:
```suggestion
**When in doubt, ask on [zulip][z]. It would be a shame to put a lot of work
into a PR that ends up not getting merged!**
```

> 

Reviewer 6: We should link to the [forge's chapter on MCPs](https://forge.rust-lang.org/compiler/mcp.html).

### Building and Testing `rustc`

Here is a summary of the different commands for reference, but you probably
should still read the rest of the section:

| Command | When to use it |
| --- | --- |
| `x.py check` | Quick check to see if things compile; rust-analyzer can run this automatically for you |
| `x.py build --stage 1` | Build just the 1st stage of the compiler; this is faster than building stage 2 and usually good enough |
| `x.py build --stage 1 --keep-stage 1` | Build the 1st stage of the compiler and skips rebuilding the library; this is useful after you've done an ordinary stage1 build to skip compilation time, but it can cause weird problems. (Just do a regular build to resolve.) |
| `x.py test --stage 1` | Run the test suite using the stage1 compiler (first build) |
| `x.py test --stage 1 --keep-stage 1` | Run the test suite using the stage1 compiler (subsequent builds) |
| `x.py test --stage 1 --bless [--keep-stage 1]` | Run the test suite using the stage1 compiler _and_ update expected test output. |
| `x.py build` | Do a full 2-stage build. You almost never want to do this. |

> | `x.py test` | Do a full 2-stage build and run all tests. You almost never want to do this. |

Reviewer 4: The only time I've had this come up was for https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/68692#issuecomment-580899667, where something failed in stage 2 libtest and nowhere else. That was definitely an edge case though.

Author: For me there were some tests that failed with stage 2 in libstd for some reason... iirc, they had to do with networking and locking...

There are some official procedures to know about. This is a tour of the
highlights, but there are a lot more details, which we will link to below.

### Code Review

> When you open a PR on the `rust-lang/rust` repo, a bot called `@highfive` will

Reviewer: `@highfive` is for Servo, I believe, whereas Rust's bot is `@rust-highfive`

```suggestion
When you open a PR on the `rust-lang/rust` repo, a bot called `@rust-highfive` will
```
